---
title: CBE 179
permalink: p/cbe179
layout: default
category: misc
---

Introduction to Process Technology of Solid-State Materials Devices
===================================================================

This course is primarily concerned with manufacturing—"microfabrication"—of devices made from thin solid films.

The prototype device is the solid state transistor–based integrated circuit—the 'chip' that is used in computers and many other devices for **logic** and **information storage**.

We'll start the class by watching the (somewhat dated) DVD called "Silicon Run". This may be on Lecture 2.

Manufacturing Steps
-------------------

The processes used to manufacture these devices are based on a relatively few basic steps:

**bulk crystal growth (silicon, mostly)**

-   make wafers on which devices are manufactured

**chemical reactions with surfaces**

-   cleaning
-   oxidation
-   etching

**thin-film formation**

-   evaporation
-   sputtering
-   epitaxy
-   chemical vapor deposition
-   spin coating

**photolithography**

**semiconductor doping**

-   solid-state diffusion
-   ion implantation

We will analyze some of these processes using fundamental chemical engineering concepts.

Semiconductor Fundamentals
--------------------------

Key idea: The transistor-based operations in a modern electronic device are all related to the idea that an electrical signal can be turned off or on, or be amplified, by another (generally smaller) signal.

Charge Density and Mobility
---------------------------

For electrons, the mobility $\\mu_n$ is defined:

\\begin{equation}

` \mu_n \equiv \frac{\vec{v_d}}{\vec{E}} `
` [=] \frac{\frac{\mathrm{m}}{\mathrm{s}}}{\frac{\mathrm{v}}{\mathrm{m}}} `
` = \frac{\mathrm{m}^2}{\mathrm{v} \cdot \mathrm{s}}`
` \label{eq:mobility}`

\\end{equation}

For Si at 300K, $\\mu_n \\approx 1360 \\frac{\\mathrm{cm}^2}{\\mathrm{v} \\cdot \\mathrm{s}}$ and for holes, $\\mu_p \\approx 460 \\frac{\\mathrm{cm}^2}{\\mathrm{v} \\cdot \\mathrm{s}}$

The **flux** of charge is $\\frac{\\text{\# of charges}}{\\text{area} \\cdot \\text{time}}$ and the drift flux is written:

\\begin{equation}

` \vec{J}_{n,drift} = \vec{v}_d \cdot n_n`
` \label{eq:driftflux}`

\\end{equation}

The drift **current density** is:

\\begin{equation}

` \vec{q}_n = e \cdot \vec{J}_n = e \cdot \vec{v}_d \cdot n_n`
` \label{eq:currentdensity}`

\\end{equation}

The important point here is that the **current** in the solid material is proportional to the free charge density.

Doping
------

The free charge density can be **dramatically** altered by the addition of certain dopants or impurities in the crystal lattice by the addition of dopants or impurities into the crystal lattice.

"N-type" dopants are electron (negative charge) **donors**, e.g. group V elements such as P, As, or Sb in Si. "P-type" dopants are electron acceptors (creating free positive charges, 'holes'), e.g. group III elements.

Why?

-   group V elements have 5 valence electrons
-   group III elements have 3 valence electrons

Consider Sb, a group V element:

[frame|none|figure 1.X - Antimony dopant bonding structure](/file:N-type_dopant.gif "wikilink")

extra electron given up easily, leaving behind an immobile positive ion, $\\text{Sb}^+$.

Similarly, Boron (B) has only 3 valence electrons, so it "accepts" an electron from an adjacent bond, leaving behind a mobile positive hole and creating an immobile negative ion $\\text{B}^-$:

[frame|none|figure 1.X - Boron dopant bonding structure](/file:P-type_dopant.gif "wikilink")

How do holes move? Electrons jump from one bond to the open hole:

$$

` \text{Si}\ ^{\bullet}_{\bullet}\ `
` \color{blue}{\text{Si}}\ ^{+}_{\bullet}\ `
` \color{red}{\text{Si}} `
` \rightarrow `
` \text{Si}\ ^{+}_{\bullet}\ `
` \color{blue}{\text{Si}}\ ^{\bullet}_{\bullet}\ `
` \color{red}{\text{Si}}`

$$ (an electron moving to the right is equivalent to a hole moving to the left)

$N_D$ is density of **donor** atmos and $N_A$ is density of **acceptor** atoms.
